Yes, and made apologies for it. Oh, was anyone
killed? No, no. No one was killed. Just a question
of a fight. I don't think there were. There may have
been minor injuries. I'm not aware. As I recall,
there were no major injuries at any time. Nobody
had to go to the hospital. And
we...
I told him that we were going to the death school
with two people involved.
He said that was
satisfactory. We went on back and handled
him, and handled him, and handled him, and the
court-martialed him, and sent him back to the
state. What was the verdict and punishment? The
punishment was not, was not a gross, a gross
sentence.
I think
we find one of them, the one that started it, and the
other one that gave him a Did
you have to sit on the court martial? No. No,
I am proven. Do you think that this was part of, you
know, during the mid-1960s, of course, we had a lot
of black riots, civil rights movements. Was that
part of this, or did this have an impact on you? Yes,
it did, because this is what this guy told us about
the impact it was having over in the States versus
what we had there. And we had integrated
everything. We had no,
the only, he said that they would click together,
these younger guys, were really the ones causing
them trouble. They would click together. And then
pretty soon you had a big problem. They'd get
together and congregate together. And that's
what was causing the problem. What we did was
separate them out so that they were really in there
and not all put together. So some of them, they'd
separate them as far as the barracks were
concerned. Yes. Some of them here and now, and all
of them help. But they still go back and get it.
Sure. Did it decrease the amount of attention?
Yes. It did lower the attention. And we tried to,
well, just everything was made as equal as we could
make it for everyone. As a matter of fact, my age was
covered. Sorry?
He was helped too. He was helped? He was helped. In
what way? In the talking about conditions. The way
they saw things. What the problems were.
What did he think of the changes that you made? He
was formed.
And he felt that you were improving morale? Yes.
That
was a major problem? Oh, in the States, in the Air
Force, you know, in all the services.
That was the only incident that you had? The only
incident I had was in the Air Force. Of
course, during this time, Europe has sort of taken
a second place to war in Vietnam, and did- I thought
that there was a tremendous buildup in Southeast
Asia, and of course a decrease in supplies and
troops in Europe. Did that have an impact on you and
the Azores?
I don't think it did, except it slowed down the
amount of traffic that's come through. Several
big exercises every year. Came through. A lot of
deployments. Rapid deployments.
Sure. And did you ever have missions or training
exercises with the Portuguese?
Yes. Unless
they
had
a very small air force. Oh, yes. They only had C-54
and a couple other small airplanes there. That's
all they had. The only thing, they were Air City
Rescue. That's all we did. We practiced Air City
Rescue mission.
with that part of the Portuguese Air Force. And
did, I mean, were you ever called in to help them as
far as RC rescue? No.
How were the relations between your men in general
on these, or your airmen and your officers and the
Portuguese that lived in that area?
There was no tension at all.
The presence of the base there meant a lot to the
economy of that island.
It's called the Isle of Tessera, which means the
Third Island, and it was a third great island.
not particularly blessed with a lot of good land
to raise cows or, I mean, till, much less, and also
raise cows. We had
a few cows. They raised grapes
and vegetables. That's about all. Now that you are
a general and now that you're in a diplomatic
position, I would imagine
Well,
we had a lot of pressure on the wives at the squadron
officer school because we made all the wives
participate. The wives participated in
everything. Well, not everything, all the
functions. We have a,
as soon as the athletics were over, The families
would all join together with a section, and then
they'd have hamburgers or cook something, and
beer, and soft drinks.
Have a big get-together, then we'd have dining in,
so the wives would all come to those. Normal
clothes.
We had
a big awards night, and all the wives attended. We
had graduation ceremonies. We did a whole part of
that. And your wife, because you were a
commandant, was she sort of formally in charge of
the wives who were the instructors and the
students? Yeah. And in these, or is... Did you or
your wife ever have an opportunity to learn
Portuguese? Yes, we both did. Oh, did you? Oh,
yeah. When I left. Because I noticed you don't have
a school here for Portuguese. Usually they have a
school. Well, we
attended school there on the base.
Mm-hmm. One afternoon a week, every week.
I even gave my farewell address in Portuguese. I
don't know if he understood the word because it all
collapsed.
And then the Air Attaché said he
could understand it. Vince Bennett, the Air
Attaché, is a guy we worked through as an
ambassador.
He would come over and meet with us periodically.
What do you think of the quality of the Portuguese
Air Force
and the officers that you have? The officers were
very impressive, Portuguese officers. Very
proud people.
They don't take time in the criticism because they
are so proud. So
you never saw a pal on the back of it. We got to be very
close friends. And he did this here in the States.
No kidding. So we've been back. And they had the
takeover over there by the socialists. He was
forced to retire. He's
gotten back in since then. He's been doing certain
jobs for the Air Force. And he's trying to get
there. His retirement reversed, but I don't think
he will. He may have been present with me, but he's
very bitter towards me. I don't know.
He thinks you're back to normal. Yeah, it seems
that way.
What were your feelings in here about the
revolution?
It scared
me. The chance of confidence didn't end. But I
don't think the Portuguese are ready for it.
They're
just not the type. I
don't believe it. What do you mean
they're not the type? They're too individual.
They're not going to submit to that type of regime.
I don't believe it. They're more used to it. Almost
dictatorship.
We were more liable
to go for
that side. Very conservative. But Salazar is
still in? No, Salazar is in. Well, I know, but was he
in when you were there? Oh, yeah. Yeah, that's what
I meant. And Salazar. Did you have an opportunity
to meet him? What did you think of him? Very
impressive person. Very. In what way?
He seemed to have command of himself and
everything. Very sure of himself.
I thought he was doing what was best for the
country, really. The feeling it gave me was that he
was doing what he thought was best for
the country
all the time. He was not an opportunist. Was he
friendly with the Americans?
I don't think we'd been there if we weren't. Yeah.
Well, let's stop right here for a minute, okay? Is
there anything else about the Azores that we
should discuss?
No, I don't think so. Well, you had a real quick next
assignment, Vice Commander, 12th Air Force Base
at Bergstrom, which only lasted from October 69 to
May 1970. Why was it so brief? Usually, what's
that, a two-year job? Well, you have no set tours as
a general officer. You just go when they say and do
what they say, and
your life's not your own. I think they needed
somebody over in Vietnam in a hurry, because
somebody finished up or something, and I went over
to finish up the tour. I was happy to get the
opportunity. At Bergstrom,
was it basically a question of hearing, by this
time, We were training pilots. Our major thrust
was training pilots for replacement pilots to go
to Vietnam, yes. Now, because of the difference in
that type of war, the jungle warfare versus the
regular World War II or Korean War, was there a
different emphasis on training?
Well, the emphasis was making them combat-ready
in the aircraft to perform the missions that the
aircraft was capable of performing. And then when
they went to Vietnam, they were prepared to do
whatever was required. They could do any mission
that was required in their particular aircraft.
And most of these aircrafts, of course, were the
jet aircrafts, even though we did use prop planes.
By that time, they were all. The Vietnamese had the
props then. One thing about Vietnam was, of
course, the SAM missiles. Did you train them to
attempt to evade SAMs? Well, you had evasion
tactics, yes, that you taught them. They were
given all the tactics for SAM evasion, what to do,
and so forth. What were they told to do? They had all
different. It depends on the situation. And if
they knew that SAMs were firing, well, they took
evasive tactics. And they were able to maneuver so
that they would not be intercepted. Quite a few, of
course, during 67 and 68, when they put SAMs in
North Vietnam, quite a few of our fighter pilots
were shot down. How was morale? Well, morale
wasn't... The morale when I was there was good.
Now, I'm not sure about how it was back when several
of them were getting shot down. But we had
perfected electronic countermeasures so that we
knew when they were launched and we knew more about
where they were because we had ECM aircraft go with
the strikes, especially those in the north that
not. They all had As well as all the B-52 missions,
too. And the training back at Bergstrom was a lot of
new technology? Not a gross amount of new
technology. The training at Bergstrom itself was
only for the RF-4, and that was only for the
reconnaissance. So we had the other bases at Luke
and Nellis and George and
I don't remember. We had several other bases where
we were training people on different types of
aircraft. Now, when you got to Bergson, did you
apply for Vietnam? When you get to be a general
officer, you don't apply for anything. But you
must have friends and said, gee, I sure would like
to get to Vietnam. I mean, did you tell anybody that
you wanted to get over there because you were next
to her duty in June of 1970?
It was in Vietnam. Yeah. I was happy to go. I wanted
to go. As
I said before, when you get to be a general officer,
you don't ask questions. You just go where you're
told, and if somebody wants you, they'll call for
you. If they don't, they won't. Okay. Now... You
have no choice in the matter. Right. You were at Tan
Sonot for the 7th Air Force And you were in
operations. Yeah. What exactly was your job? The
job was to direct all the operations of the
different organizations
that were under Seventh Air Force. I wrote all the
ops orders, tell them what to do, and coordinated
with intelligence to send out that information.
and
directed the reconnaissance missions to fulfill
the intelligence requirements, and
evaluated the performance of the units below, and
evaluated requirements of what was going to be
needed in the future for whatever program that we
had, whatever our program was going to be. in the
ongoing year and
provide the command and the control for the
direction of the commander to direct the
operation. Now, when you were down there, Was it
the responsibility of the 7th Air Force,
basically that core area? No, the responsibility
of the 7th Air Force was the responsibility for the
whole. For the whole Vietnamese theater, but not
including Thailand. Including Thailand.
Including Thailand. Including Thailand.
They're everything in Southeast Asia. Okay, and
Okinawa? No, not Okinawa. So who controlled the
B-52s? The B-52s were, we controlled the B-52s,
their strikes. But we only had operational
control over them. Right. Then you went back to
Okinawa. Yeah. Okay. This war, of course, has been
debated by historians now for a long time, and was
debated by the public at large for a few years,
especially when you were there. And I'd like to ask
you some questions about that war. How did you feel
that we were getting along with the South
Vietnamese? Well, we were getting along with the
South Vietnamese Air Force fairly well, but I
don't think we were getting along too well with the
South Vietnamese people. I think it was a dirty,
rotten mess. It was a no-win war, which is
ridiculous. The situation that we put our forces
in, we put our people in, was almost inexcusable. I
just can't see anybody wanting to put the United
States of America in that sort of condition. Why
don't you elaborate on that? Well, when you get in a
no-win situation and the President of the United
States has to direct a squadron what it can do, then
something is wrong.
When you tie the hands of your strike force that
could have ended the war in the very beginning, in a
short period of time, and you tie their hands so
completely that all they can do is what they're
told they can do that day by the President of the
United States, then there's something lacking.
And we never will win one like that. That's the
second no-win thing we've been through. And there
was no excuse to be in the mother. And Korea was bad
enough, but this Vietnam thing is ridiculous.
It's just a dirty, rotten mess. That's all I can
say. Okay, now tell me about, give me a specific
example of this no-win situation.
We weren't allowed to bomb in North Vietnam. When I
first got there, we couldn't bomb in North
Vietnam. We had to get permission. It was directed
down from above what targets would it hit. So the
Pentagon and the White House controlled... It was
in the White House. So the White House controlled
the targeting. And that must have caused a lot of
resentment in Saigon. It did. It caused
resentment everywhere.
And I think Mr. Kennedy could have stopped it from
the very beginning. So if you don't withdraw
those, we're going to do this tomorrow. We're
going to bomb this factory or this place or this
place and then go up and do it. And if we displayed
some power at the very beginning, rather than
keeping completely hands off, there never would
have been a war in South Korea. They've been
stopped in North Vietnam. We did the same thing in
Korea. We stopped at the Yalu River. We didn't go
across the Yalu River. So the Chinese came in and
wiped us out. So as far as China now for a second, did
you agree with John MacArthur as far as we should
have been bombing north of the Yalu? Yes, I did. Of
course, I don't disagree with President Truman
firing because President Truman was the boss. And
if the boss says do that, you do it. If you look in
retrospect, everybody can look back and see what
would have been better and what wouldn't. Most of
them can. But in my opinion, we would have been a lot
better off if we had gone ahead. They never would
have come in, in all probability.
Did you sense a lot of resentment in Saigon with
your superiors? Who was your superior, by the way?
Well, George Brown, who was later chairman of the
Joint Chiefs of Staff, What
are his feelings?
I believe he felt the same way, and General Abrams
did too.
And most of the Air Force, the senior Air Force
people that I knew felt that way, in my opinion. Of
course, I can't speak for them, but that's the way I
felt they thought. Now, you made an earlier
statement that we got along all right with the Air
Force Vietnamese people, but we didn't get along
all right with the civilian population. Could you
elaborate on that? Well, I don't know what
question of getting along with them, just the
stories that were told me about encounters with
them. And the Vietnamese people didn't want us
there, I didn't think. How'd you know? Out in the
boondocks, the people out in the boondocks.
They wanted everybody to go away and leave them
alone. That was the feeling that you got. That's
the feeling I had. Now, in the... Did you have any
examples? I mean, did you have any good things to
tell you then? I had a chaplain who was in the field
with the airborne division tell me that that's
where I got the feeling, the expression of that
feeling from him, that he got that feeling.
I guess the Vietnamese had been under the French
and under domination for so long that they were
happy to be away from that, and yet they don't want
North Vietnam
taking them over.
We were there. We prolonged the war. by being
there. Or we could have, if we had done it right in
the beginning, they would never have had a chance
to come in, in my opinion.
What were the conditions like at Pan Snow? As far as
the Americans were concerned, they were fine.
Comfortable quarters, good flying conditions.
good facilities, good runways, good radar
control. We've got a good system there, a good
tactical control
system to take care of the strikes, monitoring.
How effective do you think that the Air Force was in
Vietnam as far as destroying the enemy? I mean, on
the missions. Regardless of what the politicians
controlled or which ones you could bomb, et
cetera, how about the ones that you could? How
effective were they? I think they were quite
effective. I don't think there's any question
about it. They were very effective. We were able to
hit the targets. And if the intelligence was good,
we clobbered whatever was there.
But when you can't see through the jungle, We have
an impossible problem almost. Yeah. To even
assess your game. Sure.
That is a problem, and of course we bombed the Ho Chi
Minh Trail to death almost, and we still didn't
stop the flow of supply. I'm surprised. Is that
correct? That's correct. Why not? I don't know. I
really don't know. We may have stopped the flow,
but they already had so many down there, they
didn't need them. And give them time enough to
repair and get through. And don't ever think we
didn't bomb it. We bombed the hell out of it. Looked
like the moon.
What about the Debolian campaign of the ranch
hands? as part of the Air Force. Is that also under
your control?
This, of course, has come into the news lately,
Agent Orange, and if that is going to have an impact
on the people who were sprayed, et cetera. And I was
wondering about your ideas of the use of the
deployments.
Well, I'm not
too sure in my own mind how effective it was. Some
people think it was quite effective. And others,
like me, they're not quite so sure.
It had some effect. I know that. But to be worth all
the effort it took, I don't know whether it was
worth it or not. I
just wasn't in a position to evaluate it, really.
What did you think of General Brown? What's your
opinion on him? He was fine. Fine. Fine,
outstanding soldier. A real professional
soldier.
How'd you get along with him? What kind of man is he?
Is he easy along with ours? Is he demanding? No,
he's fairly demanding, but not overly so. He just
wanted you to do your job.
He was very fair and knew what he wanted. sure of
himself.
He still was very pleasant to me, and will remain in
any way.
How'd you, did you, did you know General Abrams?
Yes. Probably worked pretty close on, on
something. Worked, well I went to his staff
meeting every week. Yeah. And uh. How was he? He,
he's a, he was a crusty old soldier. of the old
school. I admired him. Why? I thought he was a great
American.
He was very thoughtful of his men.
He took advantage of every bit of intelligence
that he could get, and he tried in every way to win
the war.
supportive of the Air Force and their mission, and
the Navy as well.
He was, I think, just an outstanding commander,
really. He had a grasp of the situation and knew
what he was trying to do, and worked at it day and
night. Hard working, man. I know he was.
In general, then, it sounds to me that you have a
very high opinion of the military leadership of
the American Forces in Vietnam. I sure do. I sure
do.
How about on the other side? How about, let's talk
about that. I know we talked a little bit about how
you got along with the Vietnamese. Air Force
people, but, you know, a lot of the blame, I heard a
lot of blame put on the Vietnamese themselves for
losing their own war, and I'm sure you've heard
that. What's your opinion on that?
Well, I think in a large part that might be true. I
don't know whether they had any
anything that brought them all together to really
want to do something. I don't know whether
I'd almost call them lethargic. They didn't want
to talk about the peasants out in the field. They
didn't know about all this other stuff going on.
They just wanted everybody to leave and let them
alone. That's the feeling and impression that I
got from talking to people. And did you take, every
once in a while, did you take trips out in the field?
Yes, I went to every one of the bases. I flew
missions. You actually were flying some
missions? Yeah. What kind of aircraft? Well, I
flew one in the F-100, and I flew one in the F-4. As a
major general? Yeah. They had you fly in missions?
Well, they let me fly missions. Oh, they let you.
But isn't that unusual? I don't think so. I flew
nine reconnaissance missions. But you didn't fly
any combat, did you? No. Yes, I flew combat. You
flew, like you flew into North Vietnam? Oh no, they
were not letting me go into North Vietnam. I was
thinking you would have been captured. I know it,
that's North Vietnam. So I went on missions in
Vietnam, where they were dive bombing missions.
And you participated? Yes. I don't know, I just, to
me. It seems incredible that they'd have a major
general doing that, not only because of your rank,
but also because of your age. What do you mean my
age? I was combat qualified in the RF-4. Well, I
know that you're combat qualified, but I was under
the opinion that mostly on these you'd have the
younger men doing these. You do, but you got to know
something about it. I've always felt that the guy
in charge ought to know something about what the
guy is asking him to do, what he's asking him to do.
He should know. Oh, yeah. But you went out in
strafing and dive bombing missions? Yes. I wasn't
doing it. I was in the back seat with a guy in the
front. I ain't doing the actual firing.
And that was typical for a major general? I don't
know if it was typical or not. As I say, there were
only three or four missions that I went on. And I
flew the reconnaissance missions. I was taking
pictures. I actually did those in Cambodia and
South Vietnam, and also
in Laos. Not with none, no. And what did you find out
on these missions? What the problem was, when they
were trying to find the tardy in the jungle, and
even though you mark it, the forward air
controller marks it with smoke, you don't see
anything but leaves, trees. So you go down and hit
the smoke and hope there was something there.
Occasionally you get an explosion and know you hit
something. Because you have no idea what you're
bombing most of the time. You can't jump.
Gee, that must have been really difficult to run
bombing missions on a night down.
Yes, it was. And difficult for the pilots. What do
you think about the quality of our pilots over
there? Outstanding. Oh, they were super. compare
them to our fighter pilots in World War II? They
were much better trained than we were when we got to
combat in World War II. Really? Oh, yeah. They're
experienced people. I mean, people, we got over
there maybe with 300 hours of flying. They were
there with 3,000 hours of flying. So there's all
the difference in the world in the level of
experience. And the machines were all
complicated, too. Oh, absolutely. And more of
technical, and more firepower. Everything has
upgraded tremendously.
How could you ever... I know one of the things that
McNamara wanted to do was to sort of quantify the
war. McNamara was stupid, in my opinion. Well, I
want your opinion on McNamara. I want you to
continue on that. I think he tried to quantify
everything and put it in a computer, and you can't
do that, in my opinion. And he wanted commonality
in everything. And that slowed down the
procurement of weapons because he wanted Air
Force and Navy to have airplanes that were common
to be the same thing. And he
lost sight of the fact that you had to have these
things now, not programmed in the future. like he
was trying to do. And he squeezed down on
the budget so that even though we were able to do
some research and development, he squeezed it
down so much that he cut out most of our research and
development.
to stay with the state of the art at this time rather
than progress. Well, that's what I think he did. He
stopped the progression in the state of the art.
There's a lot of resentment in the knowledge area
about Mackinac. Yes, there was. I guess there
still is. I mean, there was Newman. Did you ever
meet him? Oh, yes. When he came to Saigon? No, when
he came to Maxwell.
No, I didn't see him inside,
no. When he came to, um, what's it, and you just came
in to inspect, he talked to you? Oh, he talked to the
War College, yeah.
Yeah, okay. And, uh, usually we'd have a little
dinner beforehand, and he invited the
Commandants.
For me.
Were people friendly toward him? Oh, yeah. There
was no
dislike for the man personally. No, I don't think
so. I don't recall any. You can dislike a man. I
mean, not dislike a man personally, but you can
dislike what he does. His policy was still like
him, huh? I've got a lot of friends that I love, but I
don't like some of the things they do.
Now back to Vietnam, and did you ever receive a
survey from a Brigadier General that served in
Vietnam, and later wrote a book about it, and his
name was Douglas Kennard? Kennard?
D-I-N-N-A-R-D.
Never did? He sent a survey out to, I guess there
were 168 generals at one time or the other served in
Vietnam. He sent a survey out to these people and
asked them questions about why we lost the war and
things like that. You
never did receive any of those? No. At this time,
you made, or right before that, you made Major
General. Can you tell me about that?
Just that I was eligible and got promoted. Well,
you got promoted awfully quickly. Well, that's a
lot easier. You only competed with a few people
there.
second star than it was the first? Sure. Less
competition. A lot less.
And was that part of filling the job in Vietnam? I
mean, did you need two stars to do that job? Was it
usually a two-star response going? Yeah. But I was
promoted before I went. Yeah, I know that. Okay. I
was wondering about Why did we lose the one in
Vietnam? You alluded to some of this. I like your
answer. Well, because the Air Force's hands were
tied at the very beginning and they weren't
allowed to go in and
destroy the targets and the will to fight in North
Vietnam at the very beginning when we had the
capability, when we had the force there to do it,
and we didn't do it. We could have had them at the
negotiation table a long time ago if we'd started
bombing North Vietnam even after it was
authorized. That's the way we got them to the
bargaining table. But we could have won the war
before then without having to go to any bargaining
table if we'd done just the same thing.
So in other words... And our hands were tied,
actually, when we were bombing North Vietnam. The
specific targets were picked by the President.
Sure. In other words, you blame politicians. I do.
Okay.
What about the question of
reporting back to the Pentagon how successful you
were in the armament of the body counts, which were
not very accurate, according to the generals I
talked to. You just talked earlier about shooting
in the jungle, how could you, maybe you might see
something explode, how could you tell what kind of
damage you were doing if you were hitting the
targets?
Well, if you're in the jungle, you can.
But we had other targets and we could see them and we
could tell if we shot a truck up or...
And we had other techniques, infrared sensors,
and so forth. And we had smart bombs, too. They
could hit whatever we pinpointed them on. We had a
lot of success with that, smart bombs, infrared
sensors.
And when they located troops, we could put
something on them.
could at least rattle their eardrums and then hit
them. One of the charges that was made by some
people was that there was careerism in the
military during the war, and that there was
mandatory for an officer's career to get his tour
of duty over there, but then the rotation was so
fast that often they couldn't serve, often they
couldn't do their job very well. For example, most
jobs are rotated in six months, and you were there
for six months, and it was the same situation.
Could you learn that job in six months? Could you
learn who your men were? Could you work
efficiently?
Well, I think that's too short a period. I really
do.